just as we tend to say that beauty is in
the eye of the beholder we have to admit
once in a while that deception is in
part to be blamed on the people who are
themselves being deceived initially when
I started researching the religiosity of
Sam Harris
I mostly blamed him for the deception
but as the evidence started to pile up
on my desk I couldn't help but feel that
there's a very eager participation on
the part of the audience and some of the
journalists and middlemen look at this
chart here when you look at the
left-hand side of the screen that's
probably the side of Sam Harris you're
more accustomed to seeing and hearing
about his name linked to this foundation
he created himself project reason but
that's not the only foundation that he's
associated with he's also an important
member of and leader of the Hanneman
foundation when you instead see him in
the context of religious leaders who he
himself propounds as having had a
profound an important impact on his own
life people who he himself says his own
meditation practice his own practice as
a guru and leader is inspired by modeled
on derivative of then we start to see a
very different Sam Harris but to his
credit he hasn't really kept this
concealed it's been an open secret
because I think members of the public
wanted to be deceived they wanted to see
Sam Harris as he appears there on the
left-hand side of the screen they just
didn't want to see what was hidden in
plain sight what was obvious all along
that he is the kind of guy who becomes
the secretary and treasurer of the
Hanneman Foundation and in case you
imagine that some kind of tremendously
respectable academic institution for the
study of Hinduism as a religion no it's
not no it's not
there's nothing respectable about it it
is a religious foundation that exists to
propound the teaching of the white
Western gentleman whose photographs in
the middle of
Green there it is a foundation that
propounds the spiritual insights of
highly eccentric self-made guru Ram Dass
and no that's not the name he was born
with but to be fair aisel Mozart is not
the name I was born with either
we look at the list of spiritual leaders
including the one I just mentioned that
San Maris attaches his own name to
people who he says or supremely advanced
enlightened thinkers and perfected
beings people who demonstrate how
wonderful the spiritual path is and
people who've inspired his own practice
of teaching meditation when we look at
this list of names they aren't doing
anything to conceal their overtly
religious nature nobody here is lying
about who they are and what they're
teaching except for sam harris so
sometimes you can judge a book by the
cover and sometimes you can't when you
look here at Tulku or yen rinpoche your
school can rip O'Shay saya dapat Nita
when you look at these names and you
look at these these photographs I'm sure
nothing leaps into your mind these are
secular scientists presenting teachings
or presenting methods of meditation that
are strictly based on the the latest
highly skeptical inquiries into
neuroscience into the science of
consciousness these are traditional
religious authority figures so why is it
that when a white Western supposedly
scientific figure like Sam Harris steps
forward and repeats the same teachings
and the same similes verbatim that these
people he's when he had he credits his
sources fairly enough he says he studied
meditation with these people that he is
now making money he charges a fee of 120
dollars annually for you to download the
app and you can close your eyes and
cross your legs and hear his voice when
he is giving you this guided meditation
if he is repeating verbatim what
religious authority figures have taught
as religion how could it possibly be
that the same doctrine or the same
philosophy ceases to be religious when
it comes out of the mouth of a white
faced clean-shaven Western male as
opposed to these gentlemen
whom he named as his spiritual teachers
as the source of his teachings who are
wearing various
forms of religious robes and obviously
just to dial back to Ram Dass here some
of these figures who are his guiding
inspirations they were white Western
people who also chose to dress in the
exotic robes of the Far East okay but
our list is not complete
after sideout pandita we also have each
WL Punja you can judge a book by its
cover people this guy is exactly what he
seems to be he is the bad stereotype of
the Indian mystic guru and you can look
up for yourself the unstinting praise
that sam harris hasn't this guy do you
think do you think just just judge a
book by it's cover whom here what do you
think the other members of the so-called
Four Horsemen of atheism would have to
say about hwl puja you can look it up
you can do the reading you can listen to
lectures from all these people on
YouTube including
hwl pooja himself what do you think any
of the other famed and acclaimed leaders
of so-called secular atheist
anti-clerical anti religious movements
in the West what do you think the
leaders of project reason would have to
say about the doctrine and teaching of
hwl pooja and then what does sam harris
have to say
by contrast how can it possibly be that
the same teachings about meditation
spirituality enlightenment the worldview
ceases to be religious become secular
and scientific just because it's sam
harris who sang it instead of a man whom
he acknowledges as his own teacher and
spiritual guru HIV or pooja terence
mckenna
in this case again you can read words of
unstinting phrase over the top raised
from sam harris calling terence mckenna
brilliant genius and inspiration path
breaker and he's none of those things
you can hear terence mckenna's speaking
in his own voice here on youtube you can
look up his writings I would describe
him as a ranting lunatic and the only
reason why anyone including sam harris
would find any kind of
in the ramblings of Terence Mckenna is
because they're desperate for anyone to
find a spiritual justification for what
is simply brain damage in the form of
hallucinogenic mind-altering drugs and
that's what Terrace McKenna provides you
with he provides you with a so-called
spiritual excuse to disregard the hard
facts of what modern Western science
will tell you about hallucination
whether drug-induced or otherwise Ram
Dass once again a name you guys are all
familiar with none of the connections
between these people and Sam Harris are
just my opinion or my conjecture as you
know he has a leadership role in the
foundation promoting the teaching of Ram
Dass and most of these other connections
you can take straight out of Sam
Harris's own books or you can also look
at the very interesting and in my
opinion damning list of other meditation
gurus whom Sam Harris has invited on to
his show who he claims as masters and
who he also invites to provide his
followers with guided meditation via the
app that too tells you much more about
who sam harris really is than the
appearance of his face on the poster
next to the so called Four Horsemen of
atheism and maybe the biggest name of
all and the most decisive domino to fall
in this analysis is Ken Wilber because
there's one thing Ken Wilber has in
common with Sam Harris
it's that both insist that they have
transcended the distinction between
science and spirituality that they are
the rightly guided Western avatars who
will reach around in the stew of Eastern
mysticism and extract from it its most
nourishing essence to preserve as
scientific fact and it was complete
[ __ ] when Ken Wilber did this act
and in many ways the more you know about
ken Wilbur's work the connection between
Ken Wilber and Sam Harris it starts to
seem like in many ways Ken Wilber really
was a guiding influence on Sam Harris
and in some ways Sam Harris is trying to
be the new Ken Wilber I said at the
start of this
that these shocking facts have been
hidden in plain sight
it's also fair to say that both the
mainstream press and we as members of
the audience have been distracted from
the overwhelming significance of Sam
Harris's ideological and religious
commitment to teaching meditation to
being a spiritual guru in his own right
by a series of controversies that
Samaras has stoked up whether cynically
or sincerely resulting in his own shall
we say rising star or his self-promotion
I think we all have tended to overlook
the bizarre religious mission of Sam
Harris because one he's kind of
right-wing probably most of you in the
audience have an uncle who is more
right-wing the Samaras but yes it does
remain shocking in some circles the
extent to which yeah he's kind of a
footing - he's kind of racist I'm again
you may or may not have an uncle who is
at least as racist as Sam Harris it's
not tremendously shocking but once the
helices up and yeah three he grabs
headlines with edgy statements about
being Pro torture about being opposed to
the tolerance of Islam he manages to
make even bland opinions he holds seem
offensive and he seems to be constantly
flirting with far right-wing figures
including yes the notorious charles
murray each one of these controversies
has effectively promoted his career but
it has also distracted us away from the
very simple and I think extremely
important question that I'm raising this
video the critique of sam harris as a
right-wing hack precludes putting him in
the same category as ken wilber and alan
watts and that is precisely the category
he belongs in he is a white Western
spiritual leader teaching meditation and
teaching meditation at a profit claiming
to reinterpret the mysterious religions
the ancient East that he knows
absolutely nothing about let's let's
make one thing very clear Alan Watts Ken
Wilber and Sam Harris out of the three
of them how many could read Sanskrit
how many could read Chinese who he could
read pally how many could read how many
did a legitimate authentic scriptural
research and then you could also ask how
many of them did any kind of legitimate
anthropological research in terms the
reality of what these religions are in
the real world today and in my in my
biased opinion it's a zero across the
board perhaps the most shameful question
of all is this why don't
his atheist colleagues ever criticize
his mission and his faith it seems kind
of laughable to me that sam harris is
sitting on the board of directors he's
that the number two man in the hanuman
finishin seems titled to me but the
other people who are sitting at that
table with him literally and
figuratively what do you think their
perspective on that would be what do you
think Richard Dawkins has to say about
the handyman foundation the doctrine of
Ram Dass CERN and so forth what do you
think Richard Dawkins or anyone in his
camp would have to say about the excuses
for the use of hallucinogenic
mind-altering drugs presented by Terence
Mckenna
right whether we're talking about
someone wearing a robe and literally
wrapping themselves in the mystique of
the far-east or not if we're talking
with someone who wears a suit and tie
and attempts to sort of cyant I as these
claims right what do you think what
you're talking some perspective than
that there has been a very strange code
of silence amongst sam Harris's allies
I've got an article clip there in the
bottom right corner of the screen
Sam Harris the new atheist with a
spiritual side there is absolutely
nothing but unstinting praise for sam
harris in that article in The Guardian
newspaper and that's a little bit
surprising to me okay but the Guardian
newspaper can have whatever kind of bias
they want they can promote them from one
person to another but I'm asking the
question if you are Richard Dawkins or
if you're just a fan of Richard Dawkins
would you not be inclined to condemn
this in the harshest terms possible and
not just to condemn it because it's
taken
the ancient superstitions of India and
East Asia and repackaging them promoting
them from modern Western consumption but
wouldn't you condemn it all the more
harshly because it is taking the name of
science and dragging it through the mud
this is partly an insult to the
religions of the Far East but it's much
more importantly an insult to science
right this is presenting pseudoscience
as science in a way that's dangerous and
in a way that people like Richard
Dawkins are supposed to be passionate
about opposing so where is the
opposition the fact that sam harris
claims his cult of meditation as
scientifically valid is nothing new
hindus buddhists and con artists like
ken wilber alike have claimed for years
to reconcile science and Eastern
mysticism this makes it more important
for real scientists to refute him not
less I'm going to close the video by
reading to you now a letter from a
member of the audience someone who wrote
in in response to my earlier videos
criticizing sam harris just a few days
ago let me remind you that this game of
misrepresenting the ancient wisdom of
the east as newly discovered european
science is not new that was a game
really invented in the 1960s by the so
called TM movement Transcendental
Meditation and what's noteworthy there
is that they started off by presenting
themselves as westernized and
deracinated as possible people would
start off being told that Transcendental
Meditation was a purely scientific
therapeutic exercise of the mind that
had scientifically proven benefits
medical benefits blah blah blah but then
step-by-step they'd be drawn into a cult
where they were presenting flowers to a
statue of the great leader all dressed
in traditional Hindu robes chanting in
some kind of broken Sanskrit
step-by-step
you know the veil of science and
scientists
tremendously strong cultural continuum
what I can only call cult culture so the
viewer writes in to say hi I watched
your video of meditation I went to a
silent view Pastner retreat years ago I
realized on day six that the Pastner
program started out very secular and
little by little it got extremely
religious the lecturers started out so
friendly and quickly turned to dogma
hours were spent meditating and I came
to a profound but obvious conclusion
while I was there the conclusion is
under the right circumstances I can
believe anything
it wasn't what they were teaching but I
figured it out I feel like I got lucky
you were one of few people have found
kind of saying the same thing that I
figured out thanks for your videos I
hope we can chance him the study of
religion consists of the study of errors
accumulated over millennia by humankind
the study of religion for those of us
who truly are experts burdens us with
the awareness that if we don't take
urgent action those errors of the
ancient past can still be just as
powerful in shaping the future of our
culture today and even worse terrible
people with terrible motivations can
reinvent the wheel they can make all the
same errors all over again in the
pursuit more often than not of money
fame power respect and sex and I
sympathize to an extent because what
most people call the corruption of
religion at least I can say that's real
when you strip away the ideology then
you're left looking at the reality call
it corruption or not money fame power
respect sex well people tell lies to get
those things
yes and will other people believe them
and make them rich and powerful beyond
their wildest dreams that's not just
something that happened centuries ago
it's happening right now
in the 21st century every day and who
who was gonna stand up and do something
about it there was a time when people
were supporting figures like Richard
Dawkins because they felt now finally at
long last there's somebody will stand up
to do something about it
and they were wrong